Transformation programme will benefit people at Sabah-Kalimantan borders: Sebatik rep
KOTA KINABALU: Sabah state government has been urged to implement a transformation programme for the people living near the Sabah-Kalimantan borders.

Sebatik assemblyman Datuk Hassan A Gani Pg Amir said the relocation of the Indonesian capital to Kalimantan will have a positive impact on Sabah's economic growth, which will indirectly benefit those residing near the border areas.

"In anticipation of this relocation, the Malaysian government has identified four main entry points, namely Pulau Sebatik, Serudong, Bantul, and Long Pasia.
"Based on statistics, there are approximately 178,691 residents across 83 villages residing within a 10km radius in the border areas of Malaysia (Sabah) and Indonesia (Kalimantan). Sebatik is part of this region.
"We need to realise that the residents in the border areas serve as a buffer community and play a crucial role in driving the economy for Sabah and Malaysia once these entry points become operational," he said when debating the Yang diPertua Negeri's policy speech at the state assembly sitting.


Hassan said various job opportunities between both regions will undoubtedly align with the demands of Fourth Industrial Revolution which relies heavily on Science, Technology, Engineering, and Mathematics (STEM) and Technical and Vocational Education and Training (TVET).
"In this context of preparing individuals to compete in the dynamic geopolitical changes between Kalimantan and Sabah, there is a great need for improved access to education systems and various capacity-building initiatives, particularly based on contemporary skills such as STEM and TVET.

"Therefore, I welcome the government's efforts in planning to construct a road connecting Serudung and Simanggaris, as well as the window programme to ensure telecommunications accessibility for the communities in the border areas.

"These two infrastructures will directly help improve access to educational facilities among rural communities."

Meanwhile, Tanjong Papat Datuk Frankie Poon Ming Fung said the Covid-19 pandemic that started in 2020 had caused the halt of flights and shipping between Tarakan, Indonesia, and Tawau.

"I understand that these services have not been restored to date. Needless to say, such disruptions have resulted in revenue losses for businesses and the Sabah government.

"Considering Indonesia's plan to move its capital next to our border, it would be worth exploring whether the government can address these issues to boost cross-border businesses in Tawau." he said.
