Sabah firm’s fuel saver makes global debut
TAWAU: After a decade of painstaking research since 2012-2022, Exorin – fuel-saving technology solution, a local made-in-Sabah product – has entered international markets such as Indonesia, Myanmar, Bangladesh, Nigeria and India.
Exorin Technology Sdn Bhd (ETSB) Chief Executive Officer, Clement Lee Nyuk Yin, said the product works on any diesel engine be it on a vehicle, boat, train, genset or heavy equipment.
“With 90 per cent of our nation’s GHG emissions from transportation and energy generation sector, any reduction on this sector will have a big impact on our national carbon index,” he said.
Clement, who is the owner cum founder of the technology, said Exorin proved GHGs emissions reduced more than 62 per cent and black smoke emission reduced by 49.5 per cent by DOE.
Clement was met at the Proof of Concept (POC) project carried out by Sawit Kinabalu Berhad at Tawau Balung Mill, recently, which involved seven agencies including the Ministry of Science Technology and Innovation (Mosti) and Works Department.
Also in the list, Department of Environment (DOE), Kota Kinabalu City Hall (DBKK), Tawau Municipal Council (MPT), Sabah Electricity Sdn Bhd (SESB) and Sabah Technology and Innovation Development Council (MaPTIS).
During the POC, Exorin conducted tests on two units of diesel engine vehicles and a unit of diesel engine power with a capacity of 350kVa, where exhaust emission readings were taken before and after treatment. Technical report of the tests shows that there is a significant difference in the readings of pollutant emissions into the air before and after the application of the technology on the diesel engine.
The carbon monoxide (CO) emission and total Nitrogen Oxides (NOx) emissions were reduced by 63.19 per cent and 62.92 per cent respectively, following the implemented engine treatment process.
“This technology had the potential to lead the nation towards a low carbon status but we will need our government and its agency, Government Link Company (GLC) to take the lead, support local product when we have proven with scientific evidence to support our claims,” he said.
He said, the state government through Mosti, MaPTIS and agencies are supporting the national agenda towards A Greener Planet and in Malaysia, the race to reduce carbon emissions had begun.
“Bursa carbon trading is launched, and this will be a future commodity for international trading,” he added.
Meanwhile, the Group Managing Director of Sawit Kinabalu, Datuk Bacho Jansie said as a local leading organisation, they have a role to play and always supportive when there is a good local product that had been proven to benefit the organisation.
In view about the government program in reduction of carbon emission, Bacho cited that Sawit has an on-going programme that is in line with national agenda towards A Greener Planet.
“If there is other new technology or methods for Sawit Kinabalu to play a bigger role to lead the state in the reduction of carbon emission, we will support it,” he said, adding that he had arranged a Proof of Concept for Exorin to carry out at Sawit Balung Mill in Tawau.
Present at the POC event, MaPTIS Chairman who is also UiTM Sabah Rector, Datuk Prof. Madya Dr Abdul Kadir Rosline; Chief Assistant Secretary of Research and Development Division, KSTI, Marshal Anthony, State DOE Director, Amirul Aripin and General Manager of Sawit Kinabalu Berhad, Lee Pee Chong.