Spur innovation and R&D in SMEs

LETTERS: A Recent article indicates that the number of doctorate (PhD) graduates in Malaysia increased in a decade from 1,247 in 2010 to 4,560 in 2020, as did the unemployment rate for doctorate holders under 35, from seven to 16 per cent, respectively.

This worrying trend goes against major global scenarios in PhD graduate employment.

Doctoral candidates normally pursue original research in their area of specialisation, eventually becoming experts and more employable.

A PhD is a versatile, well-respected qualification that can prepare individuals for careers within and outside academia.

For example, in the United Kingdom, a study by the Higher Education Statistics Agency (Hesa) in 2020 showed that about 90 per cent of PhD graduates were either in full- or part-time employment, as opposed to 81 per cent of master's degree holders.


The Hesa survey also showed more promising gains for PhD holders in terms of earnings and seniority in job roles. This is because PhD programmes provide graduates with transferrable skills that employers value.

In this regard, why are Malaysian PhD graduates bucking the trend?

There could be two critical factors: quality and sector.

The massification of higher education in Malaysia increased the number of public and private providers, but not necessarily the quality of higher education.

The article states that PhD graduates lack problem-solving skills when, in principle, they are the fundamental skills required for completing a PhD.

The Higher Education Ministry and the Malaysian Qualifications Agency are the gatekeepers of quality.

However, there are varying quality levels across awarding institutions and supervisory teams, and collective efforts can help further improve the quality of PhD graduates.

Traditionally, PhD graduates are inclined towards an academic career as many companies, especially small- and medium-sized enterprises (SMEs) do not have research and development and innovation activities.

Wages are relatively lower in academia than in industry.

The national appetite for ranking places our non-publishing academics in a precarious position.

The academic sector is no longer seen as a "secure" sector as it once was.

Furthermore, with the high percentage of SMEs in Malaysia, even with high graduate quality, there is bound to be a mismatch between demand and supply as SMEs usually do not require PhD graduates.

The demand for higher wages and the unwillingness of PhD graduates to take a step back in their career and give the company a chance could also be attributed to the mismatch between industry and graduates.

Reducing PhD graduate unemployment requires innovation and more research activities in industries and the economy. We must ensure our PhD graduates have higher research, innovative and analytical skills.

Policymakers must look at the graduates and the higher education providers — the source of the problem.

Limiting the number of higher education providers allowed to offer PhDs will be a good start in improving the quality of programmes and, consequently, the graduates.

Ensuring PhD candidates have relevant work experience before pursuing the qualification will allow them to sharpen related skills and be open-minded to acquire new and critical attributes necessary to make them attractive to potential employers and contribute positively to the economy.

Finally, the aim of any exercise cannot be to reduce the number of PhD graduates. There is a need to increase the ratio of researchers to the population (per million) as Malaysia moves into creative, productive and innovative industries.

The United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organisation indicates that the number of researchers in science and technology has declined in the population, from 2,539.6 per million in 2016 to 740.8 in 2020.

It shows where we need to increase PhDs.