Find ways to stimulate children’s interest in science and technology, Anwar tells Education Ministry

MELAKA: The Education Ministry should set up a task force to outline a mechanism on ways to stimulate children’s interest in science and technology related subjects, says Prime Minister Datuk Seri Anwar Ibrahim.

He said these subjects are imperative owing that the global pace is moving towards green technology, especially in the automotive field.

“Based on the latest report, children are now less keen in these subjects, particularly among the B40 group I have asked the ministry to set up a special task force to stimulate the children’s enthusiasm in such subjects and in solving the challenge and exploring new disciplines in science and technology,” he said when launching the 2023 national Teachers Day celebration, themed “Guru Insani Pemangkin Generasi Madani” at Melaka International Trade Centre here on Tuesday (May 16).

The event was also attended by Melaka Chief Minister Datuk Seri Ab Rauf Yusoh, Education Minister Fadhlina Sidek and her deputy Lim Hui Ying.
“This is a challenge for us and the country in moving towards green technology and electric vehicles,” he added.

Separately, Anwar also called on teachers to continue supporting the government's leadership and boost the people's spirit so that Malaysia could regain its status as a great nation in this region.

“Let’s bring this country with the strength of its language, cultures, values and technologies to catapult as a great nation in the region.

“God-willing, if the teachers are committed and work a little harder, I am sure our future will be bright,” he said.
At the event, Datuk Dr Nuinda Alias was named the recipient of the "Tokoh Guru Kebangsaan 2023" award while Datuk Mazlan Mohamad received the "Tokoh Kepimpinan Pendidikan Kebangsaan" 2023 award.

Anwar said a study found that the interest of children, especially in rural areas as well as the urban poor, towards science and technology has deteriorated.
