Tech boost for agriculture
LETTERS: A recent article warned that the global sugar price is expected to soar due to a decline in production in India and export restrictions imposed by the Indian government.

Our country's sugar supply will be affected.

It is imperative that we address this supply issue as sugar is linked to food security and a much-needed component in food manufacturing.

Furthermore, it is unrealistic to expect prices to remain the same as a decade ago. There has been a steady increase in world sugar prices, driven by the global demand for sugar.
Separately, Malaysia did not face any rice supply disruptions during the Covid-19 lockdowns because we have a national rice stockpile.


We only grow about 70 per cent of the rice we need and there is always concern that there will not be enough labour to keep this up, especially as the younger generation appears not keen to work in agriculture.

The government must strike the right balance between agriculture and industry as twin engines of Malaysia's economic development.

Both are crucial. During the 1980s and 1990s, the trend was to abandon farming for manufacturing.

But we should not see the two as in competition with each other. Indeed, there are many synergies between the two.
The advent of technology like the Internet of Things and Industrial Revolution 4.0 could transform our country's agricultural sector by bringing smart and sustainable farming to smallholders or independent farmers.

This would allow them to manage agriculture and livestock with more control and stability, while ensuring farm resilience.

Technology can also reduce the labour intensity of agriculture, which can address our need to bring in foreign labour and the angst over trying to persuade the younger generation to work in plantations.

In addition, revving up agriculture will contribute to Malaysia's quest for biofuel.

Achieving that would make the energy we consume, including for manufacturing, "greener" and less harmful to the environment in the long run.

A smarter approach to agriculture will help Malaysia punch above its weight in the food and beverage industry, such as in sugar manufacturing, animal husbandry, halal meat products, fruit and vegetables processing, oil and fat manufacturing and seafood processing.
State governments will also be able to generate income and jobs via the development of unused land for agriculture development.

Therefore, Malaysia must continue to develop its agricultural sector. An immediate priority should be food crops to reduce our reliance on imports.

We must also be willing to break with past practices.

Existing policies, including price ceilings for certain foodstuff, need to be examined. As the government has pledged to look into monopolies, if any policies are found to be in the way of what the rakyat needs, they should be discarded.

They may have been appropriate for when they were introduced, but the reality facing us now is very different due to the fierce competition for resources.

Malaysia needs political will and smart policies to realise its agricultural potential. It can be done if our leaders and people put their minds to it.