Quick guide to top high-demand and rewarding jobs in Malaysia
‘I don’t know what to do’.

“This is a common lament encountered by career services counsellors, and it’s normal,” shares University of Nottingham Malaysia (UNM) careers advisory service head, Alicia Ch’ng.

Here are three key steps to identifying the best pathway for a discerning student:

> Understand your interests and strengths: Recognising an individual’s passion is a great way to help narrow down fields to pursue.

Among the indicators of a student’s natural inclination include skills such as creativity, entrepreneurial skills, analytical skills, or technology savviness.

> Understand high-demand jobs: Understanding emerging high-demand jobs and industries can help in decision-making process.
In arts and social science, in-demand jobs are in information technology, finance, digital marketing, and human resource management.

Meanwhile, high-demand science related fields include healthcare and engineering.

Within the information technology industry, data science specialists help businesses make data-driven decisions by analysing, interpreting, and visualising large data sets.

Other specialisations include software engineers with job scopes in programme development, website creation, and technical support.

The average basic salary range is from RM5,500 to RM13,000 per month.

Students with an interest in this field can pursue Mathematics and Data Science, Computer Science with AI, or Business Analytics.

Banking, accountancy, and fintech professionals develop innovative financial products and services using technology.

Leading banking executives can command approximately RM21,000 per month, while fresh accountancy graduates can earn an average monthly salary of RM5,000.
For promising careers in this field, a degree in Finance, Accounting and Management, or Management and Business Analytics is key.

Human resource (HR) management oversees an organisation's workforce, including recruitment, training, and employee relations.

Salary expert reports that HR managers in Malaysia earn an average base salary of RM13,000 per month.

Individuals who enjoy working with people and their development can start with a degree in Applied Psychology or International Business Management.

Digital marketing professionals use online platforms and technologies to create and execute marketing strategies.
This can lead to careers as a social media manager, content strategist or email marketing specialist.

According to the Economic Research Institute, digital marketing specialists in Malaysia earn an average of RM6,900 a month.

Skills sets from a degree in Marketing and Management or Communication Studies is a great place to start.

STEM-related in-demand jobs include healthcare professionals such as pharmacists, biomedical specialists, and allied health sciences.

The mental health sectors are also growing in Malaysia, and a degree in psychology can help with that.

Still, within the STEM family, civil engineers are in demand within the construction and manufacturing sector.

Individuals proficient in mathematics and physics; and enjoy problem-solving, will find this career path rewarding.
Fresh civil engineering graduates in Malaysia can anticipate an average monthly salary of RM7,000.

Kickstart a career in this field with a degree in Engineering.
> Learn with the best

Selecting the best education environment is crucial.

UNM graduates have a track record of earning an impressive 50% more than their peers, a testament to the exceptional education and valuable experiences provided by our institution.